{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f5\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 IBM Plex Serif{\*\falt serif};}{\f8\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 Google Sans{\*\falt Roboto};}{\f9\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 Linux Libertine{\*\falt Georgia};}{\f10\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 0;}{\f11\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f12\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Linux Libertine;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red32\green33\blue36;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af3\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f3\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af10\langfe2052 Normal;}
{\s1\sbasedon16\snext1\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af4\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb240\sa120\keepn\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs48\lang1033\b\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Heading 1;}
{\*\cs15\snext15\loch\cf9\ul\ulc0 Hyperlink;}
{\s16\sbasedon0\snext17\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af5\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb240\sa120\keepn\ltrpar\cf0\f5\fs28\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Heading;}
{\s17\sbasedon0\snext17\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af3\loch\ql\sl276\slmult1\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb0\sa140\ltrpar\cf0\f3\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af10\langfe2052 Text Body;}
{\s18\sbasedon17\snext18\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\sl276\slmult1\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb0\sa120\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 List;}
{\s19\sbasedon0\snext19\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb120\sa120\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\i\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Caption;}
{\s20\sbasedon0\snext20\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Index;}
{\s21\snext21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Default;}
{\s22\sbasedon21\snext22\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\sb0\sa120\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081 Text body;}
}{\*\generator LibreOffice/7.3.7.2$Linux_X86_64 LibreOffice_project/30$Build-2}{\info{\creatim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\revtim\yr2023\mo5\dy7\hr19\min12}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}{\*\userprops}\deftab709\deftab709
\hyphauto1\viewscale100
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Default Page Style;}}
\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\pgndec\sftnnar\saftnnrlc\sectunlocked1\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\qc{\loch
Dara of Jasenovac (2020)}
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\qc\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
While nobody may expect the Spanish Inquisition, everybody has heard of the Spanish Inquisition. Between November 1, 1478 and July 15, 1834, the infamous tribunal prosecuted over 150,000 people in Europe and Spanish America. While the official records at the Vatican maintain that between 3000 and 5000 people were executed, most historians estimate the real number to be much higher. }{\loch
It}{\loch
 is rightfully considered to be one of the darkest episodes in European history. The Spanish Inquisition is far from the worst atrocity committed by Catholics armed with state and military power. In October of 782, Charlemagne, the first Holy Roman Emperor, had over 4500 Saxon pagans put to death. Queen Mary I of England, also known as Bloody Mary, burned 284 English Protestants alive, and drove another 800 into exile. Anywhere from 8,000 to 30,000 French Huguenots were murdered during the St. Bartholomew massacre of 1572. The very worst massacre carried out by an explicitly Catholic regime, however, took place in the Balkans. Between August of 1941, and April of 1945, Independent State of Croatia, a puppet regime of Nazi Germany, maintained the third largest concentration camp in Europe. By conservative estimates, at the confluence of the Slava and Una rivers near the town of Jasenovac in Croatia, 80,000 Orthodox Serbs, Jews, and Roma were shot, clubbed to death, or sliced to ribbons by the bloodthirsty executioners of Ante Paveli\u263\'3f\u8217\'92s Usta\u353\'9ae government. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
Based on the testimony of survivors and eye witnesses and directed by Predrag Antonijevi\u263\'3f,  Dara of Jasenovac is a dramatization of th}{\loch
is}{\loch
 little known }{\loch
genocide in the Balkans. Harshly criticized in the west as Serbian nationalist propaganda by critics like }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.thejc.com/culture/film/film-review-dara-of-jasenovac-1.511506" }{\fldrslt {\loch\loch\cf9\ul\ulc0\loch
Linda Marric of the Jewish Chronicle }{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://variety.com/2021/film/reviews/dara-of-jasenovac-film-review-dara-iz-jasenovca-1234890745/" }{\fldrslt {\loch\loch\cf9\ul\ulc0\loch
Jay Weissberg of Variety}{}}}\loch
, neither of whom dispute the film\u8217\'92s historical accuracy, }{\loch
is not strictly speaking a movie about the Holocaust. The Usta\u353\'9ae were not Germans. Hitler had no intention of exterminating the Serbs, nor was he particularly interested in the Balkans, }{\loch
only deciding to occupy the Kingdom of Yugoslavia after he had been drawn into the region by Mussolini\u8217\'92s defeat in Greece. Ante Paveli\u263\'3f and the Usta\u353\'9ae, like many of Hitler\u8217\'92s collaborators in Europe, were opportunists with heir own agenda. In the English speaking world, the Jasenovac death camp, like the Rape of Nanking, is an inconvenient event that established British and American historians who control the official narrative of World War II would like to forget. Were the Japanese, our current allies and trading partners, as bad as the Germans? Were the Serbs, who have been demonized in the west ever since the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s, victims of a genocide as brutal as the genocide inflicted on the Poles and Ashkenazi Jews? }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
As the film opens, the title character, played by the luminous child-actor Biljana \u268\'3feki\u263\'3f, who seems to have subconsciously internalized the historical trauma of the Serbian }{\loch
people s}{\loch
o well she barely has to act, is being marched with her older brother Jovo past a group of Croatian peasant women working in the fields. \u8220\'93Why aren\u8217\'92t they being rounded up?\u8221\'94 she asks. \u8220\'93Because they\u8217\'92re not Serbs,\u8221\'94 }{\loch
he answers. When she wonders how anybody can tell the difference, he explains that Orthodox Christians cross themselves differently from Catholics. We are not in the world of Nazi racist science --- Serbs and Croatians are genetically identical --- or western social Darwinism, but a much older conflict, one that goes back to the Fourth Crusade, and to the the extermination of western Europeans in Constantinople during the Massacre of the Latins in 1182. We are sitting on the fault line between east and west, Byzantine and Venetian, Greek and Latin, Ottoman and Habsburg. After the First World War, the Croatians, who had been the most loyal subjects of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the very people who saved Franz Joseph and the Habsburgs from Louis Kossuth and Hungarian nationalism, suddenly found themselves very junior partners in a pan-Slavic federation dominated by Orthodox Serbs and governed, not from Zagreb or Vienna, but from Belgrade. It was at Jasenovac where Croatian traditionalists, nationalists and Catholics, many of whom would go on to deny they were even Slavic, would take their savage revenge against their eastern brothers who they believed had forced them into an oriental kingdom against their will. The Roman Catholic Cain would exterminate the Orthodox Abel. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
This is not a subtle movie, and what most of the western critics miss is that this is precisely the point. }{\loch
 Predrag Antonijevi\u263\'3f made a strong dramatic choice and stuck with it. He would abandon realism for Grand Guignol black comedy, the great tradition of Serbian film, taken to its blackest extreme.  The }{\loch
Usta\u353\'9ae }{\loch
guards at Jasenovac don\u8217\'92t look like monsters. They act like monsters. This makes it all the more shocking. When the camp commandment Maks Luburi\u263\'3f, played by Marko Janketi\u263\'3f, }{\loch
orders a little entertainment for a visiting Nazi delegation --- a game of musical chairs where the loser gets his throat cut --- the Germans are offended, not so much morally, but aesthetically. This is not the clean, well-lit , efficient world of Auschwitz and Zyklon B, but a crudely violent dance of death vomited up from the very bowels of hell. \u8220\'93Welcome to the Balkans,\u8221\'94 a senior German officer remarks to a junior colleague who has gotten squeamish. Not only does }{\loch
Maks Luburi\u263\'3f }{\loch
have a strong stomach when it comes to violence, it seems to make him even hungrier. Indeed, he spends so much time eating that you almost wonder why he hasn\u8217\'92t gotten as fat as Brendan Fraser in The Whale. When he decides to finish off a Serbian prisoner with a pistol, he does so with an apple in his mouth, almost as if he were a roast pig wielding a Luger. }{\loch
Luburi\u263\'3f\u8217\'92}{\loch
s sister Nada, played by Alisa Radakovi\u263\'3f, almost seems to be a test. How hideously evil, how demonic, can we make a beautiful young woman? If Maks loves food, then Nada loves sex. She\u8217\'92s so turned out by all of the musical chairs and throat slitting that she ducks into the back seat of a car with her husband for a quick fuck, climaxing the moment the latest victim\u8217\'92s carotid artery spews blood all over the ground. If Emir Kusturica used sex in the opening scene of Underground, two people fucking while Belgrade was being bombed, as an expression of a crude life force surviving in the middle of horror, then for }{\loch
Antonijevi\u263\'3f }{\loch
sex and food are a feast for }{\loch
Thanatos}{\loch
. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
But where I think Dara of Jasenovac triumphs is not so much in its portrayal of evil but in it\u8217\'92s portrayal of good. Not only would I cast Biljana \u268\'3feki\u263\'3f, who plays the 10-year-old Dara, or Jelena Gruji\u269\'3fi\u263\'3f, who plays Blanicka, a young Jewish woman who helps her and her brother escape, as the Virgin Mary. If it came out that either of them actually were the Virgin Mary it wouldn\u8217\'92t particularly surprise me. But the heroism that both Dara, who\u8217\'92s utterly determined to keep her word to her dead mother and protect her brother Bude, and Blanicka, who instinctively gives her }{\loch
up }{\loch
life for another woman\u8217\'92s children, is not an idealized, ethereal good. Quite the contrary, it involves making hard, sometimes agonizing choices. For Blanicka, choosing to save Dara and Bude means choosing not to save hundreds of other children. For Dara, overcoming evil does not mean floating above evil. It means staring right into the face of evil ---  \u268\'3feki\u263\'3f\u8217\'92s large brown eyes see everything and take in everything --- and defeating it by any means necessary. There is, for example, only food for a fraction of the women and children at Jasenovac. }{\loch
Why feed prisoners you intend to kill anyway? }{\loch
Dara is determined that Bude will be fed. The problem is she doesn\u8217\'92t have a bowl or a spoon, and they won\u8217\'92t give her food without }{\loch
one}{\loch
. But when a guard who looks like an extraordinarily sadistic nerd decides to \u8220\'93solve\u8221\'94 the problem by machine gunning }{\loch
a dozen women and children, Dara calmly walks past the victims, picks up a bowl and a spoon, gets a ration of }{\loch
watery gruel}{\loch
 and brings it back to her little brother. }{\loch
What is genuinely extraordinary about this scene is that somehow }{\loch
Biljana \u268\'3feki\u263\'3f }{\loch
manages to express how Dara knows she is in the presence of evil, suspects that perhaps she is committing evil by taking the bowl, yet she does it anyway. Dara is not good because she is without sin. Dara is good because she is determined to survive. If the Ottoman Empire couldn\u8217\'92t defeat her ancestors, }{\loch
t}{\loch
he Usta\u353\'9ae will not wipe her family from the face of the earth. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
The climax of Dara of Jasenovac comes an extraordinarily cruel scene that is not only a striking piece of cinema but also reminds us that the Usta\u353\'9ae were the only regime in all of Europe that had a death camp expressly for children. For the children of Jasenovac the most dreaded word is \u8220\'93the hospital.\u8221\'94 In Jasenovac, the hospital, which in the outside world is a place of healing, is a place of certain death. For most of the film Dara manages to keep Bude, who is sick and getting sicker, out of the \u8220\'93hospital\u8221\'94 by pleading that \u8220\'93he\u8217\'92s hungry.\u8221\'94 Finally, however, one of the beautiful young }{\loch
Usta\u353\'9ae }{\loch
demons decides she\u8217\'92s had enough and sends Bude to the hospital and to his doom. But Blanicka has a plan. They will dress Bude up as a girl and send her away with a Red Cross inspection team that is allowed to take a token number of children away from the camp to safety.  Ante Vrban, }{\loch
Maks Luburi\u263\'3f\u8217\'92}{\loch
s most brutal enforcer, has other plans. He\u8217\'92s getting sick of the charade. As Dara and her brother hide only a few yards away, he locks most of the children in the \u8220\'93hospital\u8221\'94 in a basement. The light shines on their milky white faces, their eyes pleading for the mercy they know they won\u8217\'92t get at his hands. If Dara looks into the face of evil and overcomes it, then Ante looks into the face of innocence pleading for mercy and embraces the devil. One by one he makes eye contact. For a moment, he even seems to hesitate. But then he shakes up a grenade loaded with poison gas, throws it inside and slams the door. Vrban is not Himmler, a clinical mass murderer who wanted to keep his hands clean. Instead he is romantic, clerical,  Catholic fascist who believes that by going to hell he is serving his country and his people. In real life he ended up at the end of a communist rope. Perhaps he got his wish. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql{\loch
Dara of Jasenovac has been accused of hostility to Croatians and it certainly portrays most of them in a bad light. But my response is really \u8220\'93so what?\u8221\'94 Everything in the movie actually happened. Nobody is disputing that. The Klansmen in Mississippi Burning, the rapists and murderers in Brian De Palma's Vietnam War film Casualties of War, the sociopathic mobsters in Goodfellas and The Sopranos all paint Americans in an extraordinarily bad light and yet they reflect something about the American realty. Perhaps Predrag Antonijevi\u263\'3f could have made Blanicka a \u8220\'93good\u8221\'94 Catholic Croatian instead of Jewish. But perhaps most Croatians are mature enough to understand that the}{\loch
ir}{\loch
 country has done evil like most other countries, that Tito and many members of the partisan resistance movement were Croatians. }{\loch
Certainly no western critic complained that Andrzej Wajda\u8217\'92s film \u8220\'93Katyn\u8221\'94 portrayed Russians or communists in a bad light. But Katyn and anti-communism is useful for the western narrative. Jasenovac and Catholic fascism is not. If only for that reason, Dara of Jasenovac is worth seeing. }
\par \pard\plain \s21\rtlch\af12\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe1081\hich\af6\loch\ql\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f6\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe1081\ql\loch

\par }